Memory Controller documentation (#7376)
ydb-platform/ydb: ydb/docs/en/core/deploy/configuration/config.md

| `resolution` | When making a schedule for sending messages, discrete time slots are used. The slot duration is set by the `resolution` parameter in microseconds. |

## Memory controller {#memory-controller}

There are many components inside {{ ydb-short-name }} [database nodes](../../concepts/glossary.md#database-node) that utilize memory. Most of them need a fixed amount, but some are flexible and can use varying amounts of memory, typically to improve performance. If such components allocate more memory than is physically available, the operating system is likely to [terminate](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Out_of_memory#Recovery) the entire {{ ydb-short-name }} node, which is undesirable. The memory controller's goal is to allow {{ ydb-short-name }} to avoid out-of-memory situations while still efficiently using the available memory.

Examples of components managed by the memory controller:

> - [Shared cache](../../concepts/glossary.md#shared-cache): stores recently accessed data pages read from Blob Storage to reduce disk I/O and accelerate data retrieval.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Shared cache](../../concepts/glossary.md#shared-cache): stores recently accessed data pages read from [distributed storage](../../concepts/glossary.md#distributed-storage) to reduce disk I/O and accelerate data retrieval.
```

> - [MemTable](../../concepts/glossary.md#memtable): holds data that has not yet been flushed to SST.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [MemTable](../../concepts/glossary.md#memtable): holds data that has not yet been flushed to [SST](../../concepts/glossary.md#sst).
```

- [KQP](../../concepts/glossary.md#kqp): stores intermediate query results.

> - Allocator Caches: keeps memory blocks which have been released but not yet returned to the operating system.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Allocator caches: keep memory blocks that have been released but not yet returned to the operating system.
```

Memory limits can be configured to control overall memory usage, ensuring the database operates efficiently within the available resources.

### Hard memory limit {#hard-memory-limit}

The hard memory limit specifies the total amount of available memory.

By default, the hard memory limit is set to the {{ ydb-short-name }} node process's [cgroups](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cgroups) memory limit.

> In environments without a cgroups memory limit, the default hard memory limit is equal to the host's total available memory. This allows the database to utilize all available resources in unrestricted environments, though it may lead to resource contention with other processes running on the same host.

Reviewer 2: "the default hard memory limit is equal to the host's total available memory"

I would expect something like "total_available_memory * 0.9", because some other process may be running

Author: Actually, the real behaviour is a bit more complicated, because we also take into account how much memory is consumed outside of YDB process and add it too.

But I'm not sure if it's worth mentioning here

Author: Added

> In environments without a cgroups memory limit, the default hard memory limit equals to the host's total available memory. This configuration allows the database to utilize all available resources but may lead to resource competition with other processes on the same host. Although the memory controller **attempts to account for this external consumption**, such a setup is not recommended.

Additionally, the hard memory limit can be specified in the configuration. Note that the database process may still exceed this limit, so it is highly recommended to use cgroups memory limits in production environments to enforce strict memory control.

Example of the `memory_controller_config` section with a specified hard memory limit:

```yaml
memory_controller_config:
  hard_limit_bytes: 16106127360
```

> ### Soft memory limit {#soft-memory-limit}

Reviewer 2: You do treat "soft memory limit" for shared cache only, which is confusing... Do you have "soft memory limit" term for KQP? Why?

Author: Soft memory limit (and target utilization) works in a context of a whole YDB process

It's just that size of Shared Cache (and MemTable) calculated by evaluating current YDB process memory consumption to these values

Author: Added

> The soft memory limit specifies a dangerous threshold that should not be exceeded by **a YDB process** under normal circumstances.

> ### Soft memory limit {#soft-memory-limit}
> 
> The soft memory limit specifies a dangerous threshold that should not be exceeded under normal conditions.
> 
> If the soft limit is exceeded, {{ ydb-short-name }} starts to reduce the shared cache size to zero. Therefore, more database nodes should be added to the cluster as soon as possible or per-component memory limits should be reduced.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Soft memory limit {#soft-memory-limit}

The soft memory limit specifies a dangerous threshold that should not be exceeded under normal circumstances.

If the soft limit is exceeded, {{ ydb-short-name }} starts to reduce the shared cache size to zero. Therefore, more database nodes should be added to the cluster as soon as possible, or per-component memory limits should be reduced.
```

> ### Target memory utilization {#target-memory-utilization}
> 
> The target memory utilization specifies a threshold for memory usage that is considered optimal.
> 
> Flexible cache sizes are calculated according to their limit thresholds to keep process consumption around this value.
> 
> For example, in a database that consumes a little memory on query execution, caches consume memory around this threshold and other memory stays free. And if query execution consumes more memory, caches start to reduce their limits to their minimum threshold.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Target memory utilization {#target-memory-utilization}

The target memory utilization specifies a threshold for memory usage that is considered optimal.

Flexible cache sizes are calculated according to their limit thresholds to keep process consumption around this value.

For example, in a database that consumes little memory on query execution, caches consume memory around this threshold, and other memory stays free. If query execution consumes more memory, caches start to reduce their limits to their minimum threshold.
```

Author: Why `consumes little memory`?

Little usually refers to 'not enough'

### Per-component memory limits

> #### Flexible memory limits
> 
> Some {{ ydb-short-name }} components have both minimum and maximum memory limit thresholds, allowing for dynamic adjustment based on current process consumption.
> 
> These components are:
> 
> - Shared cache
> - MemTable
> 
> Each of these components' limits is dynamically recalculated every second so that each component consumes memory proportionally to its limit threshold and the total consumed memory stays around the target memory utilization.
> 
> The minimum memory limit threshold for these components isn't reserved and remains free until consumed.
> 
> Memory limits can be configured either in absolute bytes or as a percentage relative to the [hard memory limit](#hard-memory-limit). Using percentages is advantageous for managing clusters with nodes of varying capacities. If both absolute byte and percentage limits are specified, the memory controller uses a combination of both (maximum for lower limits and minimum for upper limits).
> 
> Both the minimum and maximum thresholds should be overridden if needed; otherwise, a missing threshold will have a default value.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Flexible memory limits

Some {{ ydb-short-name }} components have both minimum and maximum memory limit thresholds, allowing for dynamic adjustment based on current process consumption.

These components are:

- Shared cache
- MemTable

Each of these components' limits is dynamically recalculated every second so that each component consumes memory proportionally to its limit threshold, and the total consumed memory stays around the target memory utilization.

These components' minimum memory limit threshold isn't reserved and remains free until consumed.

Memory limits can be configured either in absolute bytes or as a percentage relative to the [hard memory limit](#hard-memory-limit). Using percentages is advantageous for managing clusters with nodes of varying capacities. If both absolute byte and percentage limits are specified, the memory controller uses a combination of both (maximum for lower limits and minimum for upper limits).

If needed, both the minimum and maximum thresholds should be overridden; otherwise, a missing threshold will have a default value.
```

Example of the `memory_controller_config` section with specified shared cache limits:

```yaml
memory_controller_config:
  shared_cache_min_percent: 10
  shared_cache_max_percent: 30
```

> #### Non-flexible memory limits
> 
> Other {{ ydb-short-name }} components have only one memory limit for their consumption.
> 
> These components are:
> 
> - KQP
> 
> The memory limit for these components indicates the amount of memory a component may try to consume, but consumption can be rejected if a database node exceeds the soft memory limit. Therefore, the sum of these limits may exceed the soft memory limit, but each individual limit is expected to be less than the soft memory limit.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Non-flexible memory limits

Other {{ ydb-short-name }} components have only one upper memory limit for their memory consumption.

These components are:

- KQP

The memory limit for these components indicates the amount of memory a component may try to consume. Still, consumption can be rejected if a database node exceeds the soft memory limit. Therefore, the sum of these limits may exceed the soft memory limit, but each individual limit is expected to be less than the soft memory limit.
```

Example of the `memory_controller_config` section with a specified KQP limit:

```yaml
memory_controller_config:
  query_execution_limit_percent: 25
```

> ### Configuration

Reviewer 2: It's not clear to a reader what kind of rules she has to obey. Sum of all params must be 100?

Additionally, the hard memory limit can be specified in the configuration. Note that the database process may still exceed this limit. Therefore, it is highly recommended to use cgroups memory limits in production environments to enforce strict memory control.

Most of other memory limits can be configured either in absolute bytes or as a percentage relative to the hard memory limit. Using percentages is advantageous for managing clusters with nodes of varying capacities. If both absolute byte and percentage limits are specified, the memory controller uses a combination of both (maximum for lower limits and minimum for upper limits).

Example of the `memory_controller_config` section with a specified hard memory limit:

```yaml
memory_controller_config:
  hard_limit_bytes: 16106127360
```

### Soft memory limit {#soft-memory-limit}

The soft memory limit specifies a dangerous threshold that should not be exceeded by {{ ydb-short-name }} process under normal circumstances.

> If the soft limit is exceeded, {{ ydb-short-name }} gradually reduces the shared cache size to zero. Therefore, more database nodes should be added to the cluster as soon as possible, or per-component memory limits should be reduced.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the soft limit is exceeded, {{ ydb-short-name }} gradually reduces the [shared cache](../../concepts/glossary.md#shared-cache) size to zero. Therefore, more database nodes should be added to the cluster as soon as possible, or per-component memory limits should be reduced.
```

### Target memory utilization {#target-memory-utilization}

The target memory utilization specifies a threshold for {{ ydb-short-name }} process memory usage that is considered optimal.

Flexible cache sizes are calculated according to their limit thresholds to keep process consumption around this value.

For example, in a database that consumes a little memory on query execution, caches consume memory around this threshold, and other memory stays free. If query execution consumes more memory, caches start to reduce their sizes to their minimum threshold.

> ### Per-component memory limits
> 
> There are two different types of components inside {{ ydb-short-name }}.
> 
> The first type components, or cache components, acts like caches, for example storing the last recently used data. Each of cache components has minimum and maximum memory limit thresholds, allowing them to change their capacity dynamically based on current {{ ydb-short-name }} process consumption.
> 
> The second type components, or activity components, allocate memory for specific activities, such as query execution or the [compaction](../../concepts/glossary.md#compaction) process. Each of activity components has a fixed memory limit. There is also an additional total memory limit for these activities, from which they attempt to consume the needed memory.
> 
> Many other auxiliary components and processes operate alongside the {{ ydb-short-name }} process, consuming memory. Currently, these components do not have any memory limits.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Per-component memory limits

There are two different types of components within {{ ydb-short-name }}.

The first type, known as cache components, functions as caches, for example, by storing the most recently used data. Each cache component has minimum and maximum memory limit thresholds, allowing them to adjust their capacity dynamically based on the current {{ ydb-short-name }} process consumption.

The second type, known as activity components, allocates memory for specific activities, such as query execution or the [compaction](../../concepts/glossary.md#compaction) process. Each activity component has a fixed memory limit. Additionally, there is a total memory limit for these activities from which they attempt to draw the required memory.

Many other auxiliary components and processes operate alongside the {{ ydb-short-name }} process, consuming memory. Currently, these components do not have any memory limits.
```

> #### Cache components memory limits
> 
> Cache components are:
> 
> - Shared cache
> - MemTable
> 
> Each of cache components' limits is dynamically recalculated every second so that each component consumes memory proportionally to its limit thresholds, and the total consumed memory stays around the target memory utilization.
> 
> Cache components' minimum memory limit threshold isn't reserved, meaning that the memory remains available until it is actually used. However, once this memory is filled, the components typically retain the data, operating within their current memory limit. Consequently, the sum of cache components minimum memory limits is expected to be less than the target memory utilization.
> 
> If needed, both the minimum and maximum thresholds should be overridden; otherwise, a missing threshold will have a default value.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Cache components memory limits

The cache components include:

- Shared cache
- MemTable

Each cache component's limits are dynamically recalculated every second to ensure that each component consumes memory proportionally to its limit thresholds while the total consumed memory stays close to the target memory utilization.

The minimum memory limit threshold for cache components isn't reserved, meaning the memory remains available until it is actually used. However, once this memory is filled, the components typically retain the data, operating within their current memory limit. Consequently, the sum of the minimum memory limits for cache components is expected to be less than the target memory utilization.

If needed, both the minimum and maximum thresholds should be overridden; otherwise, any missing threshold will have a default value.
```

Example of the `memory_controller_config` section with specified shared cache limits:

```yaml
memory_controller_config:
  shared_cache_min_percent: 10
  shared_cache_max_percent: 30
```

> #### Activity components memory limits
> 
> Activity components are:
> 
> - KQP
> 
> The memory limit for each of the activity components specifies the maximum amount of memory it can attempt to use. However, to prevent {{ ydb-short-name }} process from exceeding the soft memory limit, the total consumption of activity components is further limited by an additional limit, named as the activities memory limit. If the total memory usage of the activity components exceeds this limit, any additional memory requests will be denied.
> 
> As a result, while the combined individual limits of the activity components might collectively exceed the activities memory limit, each component's individual limit should be less than this overall cap. Additionally, the sum of the minimum memory limits for the cache components plus the activities memory limit needs to be less than the soft memory limit.
> 
> There are some other activity components, currently they do not have any individual memory limits.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Activity components memory limits

The activity components include:

- KQP

The memory limit for each activity component specifies the maximum amount of memory it can attempt to use. However, to prevent the {{ ydb-short-name }} process from exceeding the soft memory limit, the total consumption of activity components is further constrained by an additional limit known as the activities memory limit. If the total memory usage of the activity components exceeds this limit, any additional memory requests will be denied.

As a result, while the combined individual limits of the activity components might collectively exceed the activities memory limit, each component's individual limit should be less than this overall cap. Additionally, the sum of the minimum memory limits for the cache components, plus the activities memory limit, must be less than the soft memory limit.

There are some other activity components that currently do not have individual memory limits.
```

Example of the `memory_controller_config` section with a specified KQP limit:

```yaml
memory_controller_config:
  query_execution_limit_percent: 25
```

> ### Configuration parameters
> 
> Each configuration parameter applies within the context of a single database node.
> 
> As mentioned above, it is expected that the sum of the minimum memory limits for the cache components plus the activities memory limit should be less than the soft memory limit.
> 
> This restriction can be written in a simplified form:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Configuration parameters

Each configuration parameter applies within the context of a single database node.

As mentioned above, the sum of the minimum memory limits for the cache components plus the activities memory limit should be less than the soft memory limit.

This restriction can be expressed in a simplified form:
```

$shared\_cache\_min\_percent + mem\_table\_min\_percent + activities\_limit\_percent < soft\_limit\_percent$

Or in a detailed form:

$Max(shared\_cache\_min\_percent * hard\_limit\_bytes / 100, shared\_cache\_min\_bytes) + Max(mem\_table\_min\_percent * hard\_limit\_bytes / 100, mem\_table\_min\_bytes) + Min(activities\_limit\_percent * hard\_limit\_bytes / 100, activities\_limit\_bytes) < Min(soft\_limit\_percent * hard\_limit\_bytes / 100, soft\_limit\_bytes)$

> Parameters | Default | Description
> --- | --- | ---
> `hard_limit_bytes` | CGroup&nbsp;memory&nbsp;limit&nbsp;/<br/>Host memory | Hard memory usage limit.
> `soft_limit_percent`&nbsp;/<br/>`soft_limit_bytes` | 75% | Soft memory usage limit.
> `target_utilization_percent`&nbsp;/<br/>`target_utilization_bytes` | 50% | Target memory utilization.
> `activities_limit_percent`&nbsp;/<br/>`activities_limit_bytes` | 30% | Activities memory limit.
> `shared_cache_min_percent`&nbsp;/<br/>`shared_cache_min_bytes` | 20% | Minimum threshold for the shared cache memory limit.
> `shared_cache_max_percent`&nbsp;/<br/>`shared_cache_max_bytes` | 50% | Maximum threshold for the shared cache memory limit.
> `mem_table_min_percent`&nbsp;/<br/>`mem_table_min_bytes` | 1% | Minimum threshold for the MemTable memory limit.
> `mem_table_max_percent`&nbsp;/<br/>`mem_table_max_bytes` | 3% | Maximum threshold for the MemTable memory limit.
> `query_execution_limit_percent`&nbsp;/<br/>`query_execution_limit_bytes` | 20% | KQP memory limit.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Parameter | Default | Description |
| --- | --- | --- |
| `hard_limit_bytes` | CGroup&nbsp;memory&nbsp;limit&nbsp;/<br/>Host memory | Hard memory usage limit. |
| `soft_limit_percent`&nbsp;/<br/>`soft_limit_bytes` | 75% | Soft memory usage limit. |
| `target_utilization_percent`&nbsp;/<br/>`target_utilization_bytes` | 50% | Target memory utilization. |
| `activities_limit_percent`&nbsp;/<br/>`activities_limit_bytes` | 30% | Activities memory limit. |
| `shared_cache_min_percent`&nbsp;/<br/>`shared_cache_min_bytes` | 20% | Minimum threshold for the shared cache memory limit. |
| `shared_cache_max_percent`&nbsp;/<br/>`shared_cache_max_bytes` | 50% | Maximum threshold for the shared cache memory limit. |
| `mem_table_min_percent`&nbsp;/<br/>`mem_table_min_bytes` | 1% | Minimum threshold for the MemTable memory limit. |
| `mem_table_max_percent`&nbsp;/<br/>`mem_table_max_bytes` | 3% | Maximum threshold for the MemTable memory limit. |
| `query_execution_limit_percent`&nbsp;/<br/>`query_execution_limit_bytes` | 20% | KQP memory limit. |
```

| `progress_threshold` | The actor system supports requesting message sending scheduled for a later point in time. The system might fail to send all scheduled messages at some point. In this case, it starts sending them in "virtual time" by handling message sending in each loop over a period that doesn't exceed the `progress_threshold` value in microseconds and shifting the virtual time by the `progress_threshold` value until it reaches real time. |
| `resolution` | When making a schedule for sending messages, discrete time slots are used. The slot duration is set by the `resolution` parameter in microseconds. |

> ## Memory {#memory}

Reviewer: For your information, this documentation section is undergoing a major refactoring. This patch mostly changes the old content that has yet to be adapted to the new structure. However, as far as I remember, no other open PRs are changing these particular files right now, so it seems fine to apply this PR and continue the refactoring later.

### Hard memory limit

The hard memory limit specifies the total amount of available memory.

By default, the hard memory limit is set to the process's CGroup memory limit. 

In environments without a CGroup memory limit, the default hard memory limit is equal to the total available memory of the host. This allows the database to utilize all available resources in unrestricted environments, though it may lead to resource contention with other processes running on the same host.

Additionally, the hard memory limit can be specified in the configuration. Note that the database process may still exceed this limit, so it is highly recommended to use CGroup memory limits in production environments to enforce strict memory control.

Example of the `memory_controller_config` section with a specified hard memory limit:

```yaml
memory_controller_config:
  hard_limit_bytes: 16106127360
```

### Per component memory limits

Certain components have their own memory limits. Currently, these components are Shared Cache and MemTable.

Most memory limits have both minimum and maximum thresholds, allowing for dynamic adjustment based on current process consumption.

> Memory limits can be configured either in absolute bytes or as a percentage relative to the hard memory limit. Using percentages is advantageous for managing database clusters with nodes of varying capacities. If both absolute byte limits and percentage limits are specified, the system uses a combination of both.

Reviewer: What does a "combination of both" mean? I'd expect it to convert everything to bytes and use the smallest number for max thresholds and the largest for min thresholds.

Example of the `memory_controller_config` section with specified Shared Cache limits:

```yaml
memory_controller_config:
  shared_cache_min_percent: 10
  shared_cache_max_percent: 30
```

Parameters | Description | Default
--- | --- | ---

> `hard_limit_bytes` | A hard memory usage limit for the database. | CGroup&nbsp;memory&nbsp;limit&nbsp;/<br/>Host memory

Reviewer: Even though it is not technically correct, "a/an/the" at the beginning of such description tables is often dropped for brevity. It might help with the table width here, too.

> `hard_limit_bytes` | A hard memory usage limit for the database. | CGroup&nbsp;memory&nbsp;limit&nbsp;/<br/>Host memory

Author: Ok, clarified in the beggining 

```
There are many components inside {{ ydb-short-name }} [database nodes](../../concepts/glossary.md#database-node) that utilize memory.
```
